Docs: Add Runes complete series (#118)
rsksmart/devportal: docs/04-resources/08-runes/Intro-runes.md

---
sidebar_position: 1

> title: Introduction to Runes 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Introduction to Bitcoin Runes 
```

Reviewer: Update the .md URL to lowercase: docs/04-resources/08-runes/intro-runes.md

> sidebar_label: Introduction to Runes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: Introduction to Bitcoin Runes
```

> tags: [rsk, rootstock, resources, tutorials, port to rootstock, Ethereum, dApps, smart contracts]

Reviewer: Update the tags and add runes, nfts, remove port to rootstock tag

description: "The Rootstock Runes Mock Bridge opens up exciting opportunities for developers to build Runes-focused applications within the Rootstock ecosystem. This bridge introduces three core solutions:

> 1. Mock Bridge,

Reviewer: Please remove the numbers here, and just use a comma to separate.

2. Marketplace,
3. Giveaway Engine"
---

The Rootstock Runes Mock Bridge opens up exciting opportunities for developers to build Runes-focused applications within the Rootstock ecosystem. This bridge introduces three core solutions:

> | **Component**         | **Description**                                                             |

Reviewer: Any reason for the table here? The information is pretty concise

Author: It adds that necessary separation, which makes the content easier on the eyes and helps prevent users from feeling overwhelmed while reading. Plus, it provides a quick way to spot key information and understand what it does at a glance.

But its still fine using a list too.

|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | **Mock Bridge**       | Facilitates transferring Runes between different blockchain networks.       |

Reviewer: Add links to the repos if available

| **Marketplace**       | A platform for trading and exchanging Runes tokens.                        |
| **Giveaway Engine**   | A system for distributing tokens in a structured or promotional manner.    |

> These tools allow developers to create diverse Runes-based applications, further expanding the Rootstock ecosystem and promoting innovation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These tools allow developers to build and deploy diverse Runes-based applications, further expanding the Rootstock ecosystem and promoting innovation on Bitcoin.
```

> In this guide, you will explore the exciting possibilities the Rootstock Runes Mock Bridge presents for developing Runes-focused applications within the Rootstock ecosystem. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, we will explore the exciting possibilities the Runes Mock Bridge presents for developing Runes-focused applications within the Rootstock ecosystem. 
```

> You will gain an understanding of Bitcoin Runes, including how they operate on the Bitcoin blockchain using the Unspent Transaction Output (UTXO) model and the OP\_RETURN opcode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will also learn about what Bitcoin Runes are, including how they operate on the Bitcoin blockchain using the Unspent Transaction Output (UTXO) model and the OP\_RETURN opcode.
```

> **Expect to learn:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**What we will cover:**
```

| **Component**        | **Description**                                                                                              |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Core Components      | Insight into the Mock Bridge and how they facilitate Runes token interactions.                             |
| Technical Concepts    | A clear explanation of the UTXO model and OP_RETURN.                                                       |
| Practical Examples    | Step-by-step examples demonstrating how to send Runes, accompanied by visual diagrams to aid understanding. |

> By the end of this article, you will be able to build and deploy the Runes Mock Bridge and connect it to a frontend, equipping you with the foundational knowledge and technical skills necessary to start building innovative applications using Bitcoin Runes within the Rootstock ecosystem.

Reviewer: Move this paragraph before the table

Reviewer: Also remove the markdown tables

> ### **Who Is This Guide For?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Who Is This Guide For?
```

> This guide is aimed at developers interested in working with Bitcoin Runes, particularly within the Rootstock ecosystem. You’ll need some basic knowledge of blockchain technology, Bitcoin, and Ethereum, but we’ll also provide step-by-step instructions for setting up your environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide is aimed at developers interested in building and deploying a Runes dApp on Bitcoin using Rootstock. You’ll need some basic knowledge of blockchain technology, Bitcoin, and Ethereum, and to follow the step-by-step instructions for setting up your environment.
```

> ### **Understanding Bitcoin Runes**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Understanding Bitcoin Runes
```

> **What Are Runes?**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**What Are Bitcoin Runes?**  
```

> Bitcoin Runes is a protocol for creating fungible tokens directly on the blockchain. Developed by Casey Rodarmor, the mind behind Ordinals, Runes offers a more efficient way to issue tokens. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bitcoin Runes is a protocol for creating fungible tokens directly on the Bitcoin blockchain. It offers a more efficient way to issue tokens. The concept of Runes on Bitcoin was originally developed by Casey Rodarmor, the creator of Ordinals.
```

> Unlike [BRC-20 and SRC-20 tokens](https://academy.binance.com/en/glossary/src-20-tokens), Runes operate independently and are not dependent on the Ordinals protocol but operate on Bitcoin. Built on [Bitcoin’s Unspent Transaction Output (UTXO) model](https://www.kraken.com/learn/what-is-bitcoin-unspent-transaction-output-utxo), Runes is fully on-chain, offering a simpler and more efficient token system.

Reviewer: Any wikipedia or bitcoin related links on this? Instead of using Binance

Reviewer: You could also reference the already published articles on rootstocklabs and the blog at the end of this page

This UTXO-based structure gives Runes an edge over other token models, like those on Ethereum, by ensuring that all data remains on the blockchain without needing external input.

## **How Runes Work**

> Bitcoin Runes is a protocol for creating and managing tokens on the Bitcoin blockchain. It leverages two key features: Bitcoin's UTXO (Unspent Transaction Output) model and the OP\_RETURN opcode.

Reviewer: Kindly collapse this paragraph into the previous understanding bitcoin runes header

> ### **Understanding UTXO and How Runes Use It**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Understanding UTXO and How Runes Use It
```

Bitcoin's UTXO model tracks Bitcoin's movement by breaking each transaction into outputs, called UTXOs. When you spend Bitcoin, you're using these UTXOs as inputs for your transaction. 

Think of a UTXO like a digital coin in your wallet—each UTXO can represent a specific amount of Bitcoin, and when you spend it, the remaining "change" becomes a new UTXO.  

In the case of Bitcoin Runes, each UTXO can hold not just Bitcoin, but also different tokens or Runes. For example, let's say you have 2 Bitcoin Runes and want to transfer 1 Rune to a friend. 

Your UTXO will be split into one that transfers 1 Rune to your friend and another that keeps 1 Rune for you. The UTXO model helps track these tokens across the network, making it easy to know how many Runes each address owns.

> ### **OP\_RETURN: Attaching Information to Transactions**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### OP RETURN - Attaching Information to Transactions
```

> Bitcoin transactions typically transfer currency from one address to another. However, the OP\_RETURN opcode allows for more than just currency transfer—it lets users attach extra information (up to 80 bytes) to a transaction. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bitcoin transactions typically transfer currency from one address to another. However, the `OP_RETURN` opcode allows for more than just currency transfer—it lets users attach extra information (up to 80 bytes) to a transaction. 
```

> This added data is important because it’s how Runes store essential details like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This added data is important because it is how Runes stores essential details like:
```

* The token's name (e.g., "Rune of Power")  
* The token’s ID (a unique identifier)  
* Commands for specific actions (like transferring or minting tokens)

> This extra information is written into the blockchain in a part of the transaction called a "Runestone." When a Bitcoin transaction containing a Rune occurs, the data stored in the OP\_RETURN field tells the network what kind of Rune is involved and what should happen to it (e.g., transfer 1 Rune from John to Kate).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This extra information is written into the blockchain in a part of the transaction called a "Runestone." When a Bitcoin transaction containing a Rune occurs, the data stored in the `OP_RETURN` field tells the network what kind of Rune is involved and what should happen to it (e.g., transfer 1 Rune from John to Kate).
```

> ### **Example: Sending Runes on Bitcoin**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: Sending Runes on Bitcoin
```

> Let’s break this down with an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's a breakdown using the below example:
```

1. **John owns 3 Runes** stored in a Bitcoin UTXO.  
2. He wants to send 2 Runes to Kate.  
3. John creates a Bitcoin transaction that uses his UTXO as input and attaches the Rune transaction data to it.  

> 4. The transaction includes an **OP\_RETURN field**, where the information about transferring 2 Runes (this is the Runestone) is recorded.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The transaction includes an `OP_RETURN` field, where the information about transferring 2 Runes (this is the Runestone) is recorded.  
```

5. When the transaction is processed, the Bitcoin network updates the UTXO to show that John now has 1 Rune and Kate has 2\. 

> ### **Simplified Diagram:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This simplified flow shows how UTXOs and `OP_RETURN` work together to track Rune transactions.
```

A diagram can help visualize this process.
<img src="/img/resources/runes/how-runes-works.png"/>

> This simplified flow shows how UTXOs and OP\_RETURN work together to track Rune transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### **Why Use Bitcoin Runes?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Why Use Bitcoin Runes?
```

> By using these features of Bitcoin, Runes allow token creation and management without needing a separate blockchain. This makes them secure (since they rely on Bitcoin’s strong security) and simple, as they use the same underlying transaction system that Bitcoin already uses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using these features of Bitcoin, Runes allow token creation and management without needing a separate blockchain. This makes them secure (since they rely on the security of Bitcoin) and simple, as they use the same underlying transaction system that Bitcoin already uses.
```

> In short, Bitcoin Runes work by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, Bitcoin Runes work by:
```
